Poor populations are disproportionately harmed by disasters and smaller-scale events. The informal settlements where they live are in hazardous areas (for example, along rivers prone to flooding, on hillsides prone to landslide) and their informally constructed houses tend to be highly vulnerable to a range of hazards. 
Building and land use regulation has proven a remarkably powerful tool for increasing people’s safety and resilience and limiting the risk that they face, including both the risk of large, rapid-onset events such as earthquakes or cyclones, and the risk of more contained but still deadly events such as fire or spontaneous building collapse.
For low- and middle-income countries, however, this tool has proved elusive. These countries lack the mature regulatory regimes that are sustained by a regulatory “ecology” of supporting institutions. Nor have they much benefited from knowledge transfer or compliance assistance of functional regulatory regimes. Simple transfer of documents from mature regulatory systems—without specific adaptation to local cultural, economic, and political factors affecting compliance—has led to a critical “implementation gap.” 
Part of the challenge for low- and middle-income countries is the pace of urbanization. These countries will experience
a doubling of their building stocks in the next 15 to 20 years. It is crucial that this new construction helps to lower risk and does not recreate or expand existing vulnerability. While safer, code-compliant construction may add to initial construction costs, these investments can be balanced against the reduced loss of life and property in future disasters. Producing safe and resilient cities, communities, and homes must be the priority.
__Building Regulation for Resilience__ presents key lessons, experiences, and challenges to progress in building regulatory capacity for disaster risk reduction, and includes illuminating case studies of successes and failures. It sets forth practical measures, grouped into seven major priorities, to create a new momentum for bridging the implementation gap. Under the proposed agenda, the international community has an opportunity to leverage regulatory governance as a means of proactively protecting populations, avoiding disasters, and encouraging sustainable and resilient urban development. 
Now is the right time to build on this momentum. With the adoption of the __Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction__, there is a clear international consensus recognizing the importance of building codes and standards. Going forward, improved building regulatory capacity must be part of the effort to reduce risk among the most vulnerable and ensure shared prosperity.

Francis Ghesquiere
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction & Recovery
March 2016