Making Building Regulation Work for Disaster Risk Reduction in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

## Drivers of compliance and principles of regulatory practice
### Drivers of regulatory compliance
The goal of building regulation is to reduce health and safety risk by implementing and obtaining compliance with technically competent, socially acceptable building codes. In reality, however, locales sometimes draft and adopt regulations without considering how likely or feasible compliance will be.
Behavioral drivers of regulatory compliance have been observed in a range of circumstances as diverse as food safety and tax administration. What are these drivers? A widespread view underpinning the design of regulations is that people comply with rules only if there is a threat of serious consequences for compliance evasion.  This model suggests the need for aggressive supervision and punishment for violations. It requires more inspections and tougher enforcement. Individuals are assumed to be rational calculators, only motivated to comply if the costs of noncompliance are high and punishment is highly probable. 
This view rests on a pessimistic perception of human nature, not on research or statistical evidence. This perspective of compliance motivation is consistent with neoclassical economic theory<sup>82</sup> in which agents comply based on rational choice to maximize expected utility. They weigh the costs of compliance against the potential gains of noncompliance, minus the costs of possible sanctions multiplied by the probability of detection.<sup>83</sup> Consistent experience from other regulatory fields suggests that this is not the case.
///Punishment alone does not achieve compliance or risk reduction///
Unsurprisingly, studies show that threats of punishment are a driver of compliance, but not a decisive one, as dissuasion effects do not always lead to desired behaviors.<sup>84</sup>  
Compliance driven by threats and deterrence is expensive. In practice, effective deterrence requires funding the expansion of costly enforcement systems. Systems that rely entirely on dissuasion also risk intruding on privacy and individual freedoms, which may undermine regulatory legitimacy. Deterrence is important but can best be seen as one of the necessary ingredients of the compliance system, or as one that should be considered in combination with positive support to achieve compliance. 
///Procedural justice and legitimacy foster compliance///
Research has consistently shown that the degree to which regulated subjects find authorities and rules legitimate is one of the strongest drivers of compliance. Provisions for open participation and fairness in the regulatory process, often referred to as “procedural justice,” are the foundation of legitimacy and the most important driver of voluntary compliance.
Key elements of procedural justice are fairness of interpersonal treatment and behavior by authorities that fosters trust and gives stakeholders a real voice in the process. In practical terms, it means treating people respectfully, demonstrating ethical behavior, and self-imposing limits on discretionary power. It also means demonstrating that regulated subjects are listened to and that their arguments, issues, and requests are carefully considered. This approach does not necessarily lead to decision making that corresponds to the regulated subjects’ requests or desires, but it demonstrates that their concerns are taken into account to the extent possible. 
The procedural justice effects are found in many fields and settings.<sup>85</sup> A major benefit of this approach is that it helps in developing long-term, self-sustaining drivers of compliance—and in reducing the need to increase a more traditional and costly type of police enforcement. 
In the words of Tom Tyler, the key conditions needed to achieve a procedural justice effect are these:

“Decision-making is viewed as being neutral, consistent, rule-based, and without bias; . . . people are treated with dignity and respect and their rights are acknowledged; and . . . they have an opportunity to participate in the situation by explaining their perspective and indicating their views about how problems should be resolved.”<sup>86</sup> 

///Designing regulatory processes to support compliance///
Exclusive reliance on aggressive enforcement may hinder compliance, especially when enforcement involves abusive arbitrary discretion, lack of transparency, disrespectful treatment, excessive bureaucracy, and refusal to consider appeals. For example, oppressive tax enforcement and harassment of taxpayers seem to increase tax resistance, as does discontent with the delivery of public services.<sup>87</sup> 
In conclusion, regulatory and governance reforms should be based on a balanced approach between punitive enforcement and compliance support with procedural fairness. In this spirit, the following sections present specific interventions that can enhance the legitimacy of the building code process and the effectiveness of code compliance.
### Principles of regulatory practice
The World Bank, the OECD, and the U.K.-based Better Regulation Delivery Office<sup>88</sup> agree that regulators should not simply emphasize police enforcement, but also provide clear information, guidance, and education to those who must comply. They stress that regulators should find straightforward ways to collaborate and engage with those they regulate in order to hear their views.
Building on the premise that procedural fairness is an important driver of regulatory compliance, a growing consensus on core principles defines “good regulatory practice” as follows:  
+ .**Effectiveness**. Effective regulation achieves its objectives (in this case, improved health and safety and reduced disaster and chronic risk).
+ .**Efficiency**. Efficient regulation achieves its beneficial objectives at the lowest cost in terms of building cost, construction time, and long-term maintenance. Aggregate benefits, including intangibles such as safety and security, must exceed aggregate costs.
+ .**Transparency, openness, and accountability**. In the development of regulations, interested parties have the opportunity to provide their views to government via an open consultation process. Transparency in regulatory implementation means that regulatory provisions are unambiguous and readily available to the public. Accountability means that regulatory policy development, administration, and enforcement are subject to public scrutiny.  Regulators are held accountable for their actions and mechanisms for dispute resolution are provided.
+ .**Proportionality**. The stringency and compliance cost of regulatory provisions should be balanced with the risks and potential losses that they address.                                                                                                           
+ .**Consistency**. Coordination and consistency between regulatory requirements is essential. Provisions for various aspects of a building cannot be in conflict (that is, structural, plumbing, electrical, and energy codes), nor can building regulations contradict the requirements related to environmental protection or historic preservation.
+ .**Innovation**. Building codes should not inhibit the advancement of building technology or practice through narrowly prescriptive requirements.  Codes must accommodate and advance innovation and improvement in both building practice and regulatory practice.
These core principles are not always mutually reinforcing.  For example, an effective regulatory practice may result in high levels of compliance at the expense of efficiency. Conversely, an excessive focus on efficiency and rapid processing of reviews, inspections, and approvals can result in lower levels of compliance and safety. 
The balanced pursuit of these principles that underpin good regulatory governance requires an open process based on fairness and broad participation of all legitimate stakeholders in the building process.
