## Agenda to strengthen regulatory implementation in low- and middle-income countries
### Ensuring the safety of new construction and reducing the risk of existing vulnerable settlements
The two primary priorities of this report’s recommendations are
(i) to stop the expansion of disaster and chronic risk in the siting and construction of new settlements; and 
(ii) to reduce disaster risk in vulnerable existing settlements. 
New construction with appropriate design can be made disaster-resistant for a small percentage of construction cost, on the order of 5 to 10 percent,<sup>89</sup> whereas the retrofit of existing vulnerable structures may require major expenditure, in the range of 10 to 50 percent of building value.<sup>90</sup> Establishing standards and implementation mechanisms for new construction can provide the institutional and technical foundation from which to address the residual disaster risk in existing vulnerable settlements. 
The massive challenge of risk reduction in existing buildings is critically important. Removal, replacement, and retrofit of existing unregulated and unsafe buildings requires an incremental approach that can reduce risk over a reasonable period of time at a feasible cost.
The proposed agenda charts seven closely related strategic sets of actions that aim to reinforce the regulatory capacity of countries at various stages of development. 
### Seven points of intervention to establish and expand building regulatory capacity

1.	Establish a sound legislative and administrative foundation at the national level.
2.	Develop a building code suitable to local social and economic conditions that facilitates safe use of local building materials and practices.
3.	Strengthen implementation of building code through plan review, site inspection, and permitting at the local level.
4.	To support code compliance, provide advisory services in addition to inspection and enforcement. 
5.	Take advantage of opportunities for regulatory interventions.
6.	Clearly identify hazard zones and restrict development according to exposure.
7.	Advance supporting institutions. 
The agenda does not offer a sequential path for extending regulatory capacity. Reforms described in the agenda can be carried out simultaneously and tailored to the specific level of development of the cities and countries where they will be initiated.
The agenda is not exhaustive. It does not seek to address all aspects of reform or all issues related to the larger context of policy and regulatory governance. These interventions focus on improvements that can be undertaken incrementally within the realm of building and land use regulation, with an understanding of opportunities and constraints of the specific development context.
#### 1. Establish a sound legislative and administrative structure at the national level.
///Recommendation 1.1///   **Establish a legislative foundation for a building and land use regulatory authority to protect public health and safety and reduce disaster and chronic risk**.
Urban law provides the foundation for effective urban management and is essential for a successful policy implementation at the local level. National legislation provides the framework for participation in planning and regulatory processes at the local level. National policy can define the role of national and local government agencies to regulate land use and construction as well as to implement instruments for effective disaster and chronic risk reduction.
///Recommendation 1.2///  **Adopt a legal framework to support the effective enforcement of building code regulations at the local level**.
The legislative foundation of a sound building regulatory system provides for the promulgation of a comprehensive uniform building code. Beyond the building code, other legislative action is critically important to establish the basis for local regulatory implementation. 
Legislation must typically define liability rules for the construction process; professional qualification and licensing requirements for engineers, architects, and contractors; swift, efficient, and well-considered dispute resolution processes; and legal provisions for disciplinary and oversight mechanisms related to building professionals and the building and real estate industries. 
As highlighted in the introduction of this report, building and land use regimes in developed countries have evolved incrementally over time and created increasingly resilient systems to sustain chronic and exceptional risks. Japan’s experience offers a strong illustration of this principle (Box 3.1).
///Recommendation 1.3///  **Adopt other critical legislation that contributes to compliant construction**.
A legislative foundation should build incrementally on other national legislation, which exists as part of a larger ecosystem of institutions that can strongly influence regulatory outcomes. Examples of critical legislation include legal provisions for the recognition of digital signatures that enable automated administrative procedures, accountability measures for public servants, insurance laws, legal mechanisms enabling housing finance for lower-income groups, and laws establishing the process for tenure security.

#### 2. Develop a building code suitable to local social and economic conditions that facilitates safe use of local building materials and practices.
///Recommendation 2.1///  **Establish an open, participatory, consensus-based process for code development**.
A building code must reflect the social, technological, and economic reality of the country. Code documents cannot be simply transported from a high- to low-income country. Compliance must be feasible to the greatest extent possible with locally available materials and skills. An inclusive and consensus-based process for developing a building code involves the participation of building professionals, builders, building owners, and building occupants, as well as those with expertise on health, safety, and disaster risk.
Adequate building safety regulations are
+ .**Fit for purpose from a technical perspective**.  Building code provisions should incorporate the best knowledge and scientific understanding of potential hazard loads and expected structural and functional performance.
+ .**Tailored to the needs and assimilation capability of the country**, with specific reference to its risk profile, the building culture, capacity of local builders, availability of materials, educational facilities, equipment, and income levels.
+ .**Endorsed and accepted by relevant stakeholders in the building process**. There must be broad consensus on the balance of risks and costs acceptable for building performance as provided for in the particulars of the code. Stakeholders must accept the specific implementation and enforcement mechanisms as legitimate and fair.
Meeting these requirements entails effective stakeholder consultation and participation. Several tools can be used to facilitate this involvement, as follows: 
__**Notice and comment (or “public review process”):**__ The issue of interest to the regulator, the intent to regulate, or the draft regulation is published and open for written comments by all interested parties (individuals and organizations) for a given period.
__**Surveys:**__ Conducted via Internet, phone, or some other means, surveys target different stakeholder groups and audiences. They can be used to assess a situation prior to developing a regulation, to gather views on an issue or on proposed regulations, and to obtain feedback on regulations already introduced.
__**Focus group discussions:**__ These are held at various levels (national interest group representatives or grassroots, for example) and in various formats. They can be used to assess a situation, gather views, discuss the contents of a proposed regulation, and get feedback on existing regulations.
///Recommendation 2.2/// **Adopt a local building code referencing an established model code while incorporating necessary adaptations to local context**.
It is possible to develop a local code based on an established model code as long as it is supported by a thorough analysis and adaptation process carried out locally. Jamaica adopted this approach by referencing the International Code Council (ICC) family of codes.
///Recommendation 2.3/// **Develop a comprehensive building code that covers the full range of relevant construction types and practices**.
Building codes should provide for safer construction for the full range of prevalent construction types—that is, for technically engineered and sophisticated structures as well as traditional indigenous and non-engineered construction.
Nepal is a low-income country facing a daunting disaster risk. The Himalayan mountain range is a zone of exceptional seismic activity. The collision of tectonic plates that gave rise to the highest mountains in the world also is capable of generating great earthquakes. Due to the severe climate and limited availability of building materials, local construction is particularly vulnerable to seismic forces. The Kathmandu Valley was struck by a major earthquake in 1934. Since that time, the area’s population has grown to roughly 2.5 million people, who live in structures designed and built without the benefit of formal regulatory oversight. The 2015 earthquakes have more recently revealed the consequences of population increase and local construction practices. Organizations such as the Nepal Society for Earthquake Technology (NSET) have recognized the serious exposure and vulnerability of the Kathmandu Valley and have pursued a range of strategies to reduce earthquake risk for the people of the area since the early 1990s. 
In many developing countries, earthen dwellings are a traditional housing solution, as appropriate soils are abundant and inexpensive. Unfortunately, because earthen houses are built informally, they tend to collapse in earthquakes, causing considerable economic losses and casualties. The earthquakes that occurred in Huaraz, Peru (1970), and in Bam, Iran (2003), caused the tragic deaths of thousands of people who were crushed under their own earthen houses.
Peru addressed the vulnerability of adobe houses by including guidelines for their design and construction in its National Building Code. This approach illustrates how one country managed the tradeoff between the need to reduce disaster risks and the recognition that non-engineered construction was a social and economic necessity for millions.
///Recommendation 2.4/// **Establish building materials testing and certification laboratories that are accessible to major construction zones**.
Uniform and certified performance criteria for building materials are essential for the design and construction of safe buildings. The design of structures assumes that materials will perform in a uniform and predictable way. Quality control for building materials requires standard test facilities and laboratories that can certify the characteristics of materials such as cement, aggregate, cement masonry units, and steel. A network of materials testing laboratories must be located near areas of significant construction activity. 
The accuracy and integrity of the materials testing certification process must be assured through a system of accreditation. Efforts should therefore be made to expand the capacity of national accreditation mechanisms and to support actual accreditation of local specialized laboratories with expertise in building materials testing.
///Recommendation 2.5/// **Provide for wide dissemination of code documents and training for builders and owners based on code documentation**.
The local building department must be proactive in supporting the capacity of local designers and builders to comply with code provisions. Support for compliance is the necessary complement to inspection and enforcement in order to achieve building safety.
The government of Turkey and the World Bank initiated ISMEP in 2005 to address the vulnerability of public buildings in Istanbul and to reduce the devastation that could occur in the next major earthquake; the program incorporated a $460 million loan from the World Bank. An important component of the program involved setting up training programs for structural engineers in earthquake engineering, particularly for the strengthening of existing structures. Though the project concluded impressively in 2014 with 3,630 newly trained building practitioners and engineers, there was little evidence that this training effort was a permanent program and part of a longer-term pre-disaster risk reduction strategy.
The World Bank, the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), and USAID have supported training in improved construction techniques and code compliance for building trades, architects, engineers, and owner-builders in Turkey, Nepal, Pakistan, Madagascar, and Indonesia. These efforts were launched in the aftermath of disasters, but this type of training must be expanded and institutionalized for all new construction, particularly in areas of urban expansion.
///Recommendation 2.6/// **Create and maintain public awareness of basic safe construction principles for the community, building owners, and informal sector builders**. 
Post-disaster experience provides examples of successful and diverse educational and public awareness initiatives primarily designed to improve knowledge of community members, homeowners, construction workers, and foremen. These efforts are often driven and delivered by a wide range of stakeholders and specialized NGOs. Such initiatives should be expanded, coordinated, and institutionalized in pre-disaster scenarios. They should aim at demonstrating the benefits of safe building practices and creating the buy-in for a wider culture of code compliance.
Existing tools can be rolled out and adapted to local circumstances. For example, the Earthquake Engineering Research Institute (EERI) and the Competence Center for Reconstruction (CCR), supported by the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, updated a guidebook in 2015 to support technical training for earthquake-resistant construction of small buildings in confined masonry. This guidebook primarily targets masons and informal builders in developing countries. It is a leading reference in presenting the topic in simple and straightforward language and in explaining, in a step-by-step sequence, how to build a one- and two-story confined masonry building.<sup>91</sup> 
Other efforts have focused on producers of critical building materials and creating awareness of the larger community of homeowners, NGOs, and government agencies. For example, Build Change has trained and certified concrete block producers in Haiti to increase the quality of their product. It has organized marketing and awareness events for each certified block maker, in which clients and neighboring homeowners can learn about the importance of using (usually more expensive) quality blocks as well as about the costs and benefits of purchasing them.
A range of innovative communications solutions have also aimed to increase community-wide commitments to safer building practices. In August 2010, the Mennonite Central Committee (MCC) began training Haitian masons in earthquake-resistant building techniques. However, the NGO soon realized that the training of masons operating in the informal sector might not be enough to eliminate unsafe building practices. It decided to disseminate the tenets of safe construction to the public and to show homeowners, families, and friends that they too were responsible for ensuring that building standards were followed. It achieved this goal by hiring a comedy troupe and funding a lively and humorous video in the style of Haitian television, conveying clear instructions in earthquake-resistant building techniques as well as dos and don’ts for both workers and homeowners.<sup>92</sup> 
#### 3. Strengthen implementation of building code through plan review, site inspection, and permitting at the local level.
///Recommendation 3.1///  **Enhance compliance by applying principles of procedural justice and transparency**.
A legitimate regulatory process is essential to achieving compliance. The regulatory process must be transparent and open to public scrutiny. The rationale for all requirements should be reasonable and presented publicly. The health and safety consequences of regulatory provisions should be presented to the public through community meetings along with information and communications campaigns.
__Doing Business 2015__<sup>93</sup> suggests that easier access to regulatory information, such as permitting fee schedules, is associated with greater regulatory efficiency, lower compliance costs, and better regulatory quality for businesses. This finding seems to confirm that more transparency and better-quality government tend to go hand-in-hand.<sup>94</sup> 
Though transparency in regulatory design and implementation is key, it is consistently hard to measure. __Doing Business__ provides some tangible measures of how large cities apply principles of transparency in construction permitting by comparing the level and quality of disclosure for specific regulatory requirements and administrative fees.
///Recommendation 3.2/// **Communicate changes associated with local building regulatory reforms**.
Regulatory reform initiatives should place strategic communications at the heart of the process.  Two-way communication with stakeholders will enhance inclusion and the legitimacy of the reform. 
Regulatory practitioners often assume that once audiences understand the benefits of reforms, they will support them, but experience has shown that simply educating audiences and disseminating information is not enough to change behavior or to get reforms accepted.  Because the reforms aim to transform processes, responsibilities, and behaviors within municipalities, changes will likely be resisted, particularly by those who have an interest in maintaining the status quo for rent-seeking purposes. Strategic communications can help to build the coalitions and means of pressure needed to effectively address forces that hold back necessary reforms.
///Recommendation 3.3///  **Establish conflict resolution and appeal mechanisms**.
An effective mechanism for appeals and conflict resolution is essential for providing procedural fairness, transparency, and a level playing field. A quasi-judicial body involving both local government and private building professionals should be established to deal with disputes between building professionals and permitting authorities on matters related to the interpretation of the building code or sufficiency of compliance.
Where a regulatory authority registers or certifies building practitioners, an independent appeal body should be established to deal with appeals from practitioners concerning registration and certification. To be effective, the appeal system must ensure technical competence and procedural safeguards and must be managed transparently.
///Recommendation 3.4///  **Provide funding and support to building departments at the local level with technically qualified and adequately compensated building officials**.
Local administrative and technical regulatory capacity requires technically qualified building officials.  These officials carry out plan reviews and site inspections as required for all new construction, and they must be compensated at a level that both meets their qualifications and reduces vulnerability to corruption. They must also be provided with necessary support, including equipment and transportation.
Building officials must demonstrate technical competency in areas of review and inspection for which they have responsibility. These include structural, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing systems, as well as fire and natural hazards. Building officials should have professional qualification in engineering or architecture, or comparable building industry experience. Certification criteria have been established for each category of building department staff, for example by the ICC.  With appropriate adaptation, these criteria can be applicable in low- and middle-income countries. 
The staffing of building departments must be commensurate with the workload presented by construction activity in the authority having jurisdiction. The building department must be provided necessary equipment and logistical support to carry out the missions of plan review, site inspection, and enforcement.
Finally, building officials need to be adequately compensated, and the remuneration model for payment for the services needs to be carefully considered. This issue is relevant to all countries, irrespective of their income levels. 
A prominent regulatory expert, Kim Lovegrove, suggests that building officials should not be remunerated on a competitive free market model. Given their unique statutory enforcement and consumer protection role, they should be paid based on a prescribed remuneration floor (the lowest acceptable level of pay), which should be set by the regulator and adequately indexed (for example, to the CPI if appropriate). This approach ensures that the building approval responsibilities are discharged in a manner that is commensurate with the real cost of performing the statutory function.<sup>95</sup> 
///Recommendation 3.5/// **Simplify and reengineer building permitting and inspections procedures**.
Simplification efforts should be carried out at the local municipal level and first target the core building permitting and inspections functions. They should be initiated in pilot municipalities chosen on the basis of local political commitment.
For deeper efficiency gains, the scope of simplification efforts should be expanded to include processes linked to noncore building code preapproval requirements from other authorities (such as land use planning, utilities, and environmental clearances). For example, in 2006, a three-year simplification reform of building permits and inspections was supported by the World Bank Group in Egypt. This reform targeted core municipal construction permitting processes and 18 related administrative approvals from other public agencies in the municipality of Alexandria. One focus was preapprovals from non-building-code entities, which consumed almost 40 percent of the time builders spent trying to obtain construction permits. This effort was participative, and it fully engaged building code officials to ensure their buy-in to the greatest extent possible. Also impacted were other preapproval authorities involved in the building permitting process, such as the Industrial Development Authority, the Environmental Affairs Agency, and the Civil Aviation Authority.  Other simplification reforms supported by the project included
+ .Turning ex ante preapproval requirements imposed on investors into a simple notification of the building project to the relevant public agency.
+ .Suggesting and creating risk thresholds to eliminate any preapproval requirements for small and low-rise buildings.
+ .Agreeing on maximum time limits for the issuance of approvals.<sup>96</sup> 
Simplifying administrative procedures lowers transaction costs and increases legitimacy and regulatory compliance. Building regulatory reforms initiated in Ontario in 2001 relied on the two-pronged approach of improving skills and accountability of building practitioners and significantly streamlining procedures. In 2006, more than four years after the reforms were initiated, they had contributed to achieving better standards of construction, a decline of 12 percent in residential fire loss, and a reduction of 15 percent in civilian injuries.<sup>97</sup> 
///Recommendation 3.6///  **Apply ICT to support increased efficiency and transparency of building control procedures**.
Electronic solutions or e-construction permit systems and applications today encompass a multitude of technologies.  They range from simple databases and back-office work-flow applications using generic software tools to a few sophisticated, web-based systems that enable building professionals to conduct their entire management construction project cycle online. 
Efforts to improve work-flow management and introduce online permitting systems must be expanded. These efforts should be undertaken only after simplifying reengineering and administrative processes. These reforms must be developed together with a commitment from planning and building authorities to adopt a change management strategy, which will ensure that staff have the capacity to effectively utilize new technology. Relevant authorities should take into account the availability and reliability of the local ICT infrastructure when designing online permitting solutions. The legal and regulatory infrastructure should also be considered, as outdated building acts and the lack of a legal basis for online transactions and digital signatures can hamper efforts to automate permitting systems. 
ICT reforms may be implemented incrementally using open-source technologies with no license cost. Authorities may choose to build internal capacity before exposing their staff to the increased demand of online services. Building agencies can choose to first develop their back-office functions before developing a full range of online services.
With support from the World Bank Group, Kenya and Rwanda began ICT reforms related to e-construction permitting in 2011.  These reforms have demonstrated that low- and middle-income economies can introduce successful ICT platforms with a relatively wide range of solutions from the start. 
The new automated system launched in September 2011 by the City Council of Nairobi  was developed in less than two years and included training of the CCN staff and building code officials.  The training reduced time of approval by 80 percent and transaction costs for the private sector by 60 percent.  The City Council surpassed its revenue targets after it registered a 300 percent increase in permit applications.<sup>98</sup>  
///Recommendation 3.7///  **Apply risk management to construction permits and inspections**.
Risk-based approaches in construction permitting and inspections bring opportunities to streamline procedures and focus scarce implementation resources on buildings that matter most from a public health and safety perspective.
Building applications should be categorized into different risk groups. This practice has allowed one-stop-shops to be established in larger municipalities, where requirements have been significantly streamlined and third-party review is not required for lower-risk groups.
Between 2006 and 2014, 88 countries established fast-track building permitting procedures for very small commercial buildings.<sup>99</sup>  A closer look at the particular circumstances around these measures suggests that the reforms have often been narrow in scope and not always driven by risk factors. With the rapid expansion of cities in developing countries, these measures were more a concession to the overwhelming growth of small unregulated buildings than a deliberate step at introducing risk management. 
Consistent with good practice, the United Kingdom has recently started to implement a risk-based approach to home building and home improvements. To use the resources of local building agencies more effectively, it ended the practice of carrying out systematic site inspections at three predetermined stages of construction. It replaced this rigid and costly system with a risk-based approach to inspection. Local building authorities now typically develop a service plan detailing the stages of work that will be inspected. The plan considers the project’s size, complexity, construction type, and ground conditions as well as the builder’s experience, thereby providing a more targeted and calibrated regulatory response to the particular risk factors on the ground.<sup>100</sup> 
///Recommendation 3.8///  **Apply fee levels consistent with the cost of regulatory services**.
The aggregate cost of planning, building permits, and inspection fees should be set at a reasonable level that ensures the financial self-sustainability of building code municipal services. Not only should these levels be based on the cost of recovery for services provided by the municipality, but they should also strive to be affordable within the local socioeconomic context. Specifically, they should not exceed 3 percent of the cost of construction and should seek to move closer to the current OECD average of 1.7 percent.<sup>101</sup>
To facilitate compliance, building regulatory fees and collection processes should be based on the cost of recovery for building control services. 
///Recommendation 3.9/// **Leverage resources from the private sector for more efficient and effective compliance check mechanisms**.
Strengthening capacity for plan reviews and inspections should be pursued through collaboration with the private sector, following particular institutional and organizational arrangements consistent with local needs and opportunities. Major reforms in building code implementation initiated in the past 20 years have sought to take advantage of resources and expertise available in the private sector. These reforms were driven by the greater complexity of building technologies and increased pressure on scarce municipal human resources. Collaboration with the private sector has been a source of innovation in building code implementation procedures, with useful experience emerging in high-income countries, transitional economies, and middle-income countries.  
In a growing number of countries, municipalities can use licensed or accredited private sector engineers to carry out third-party plan reviews or inspections to verify project compliance with building code requirements and approved building plans.
An encouraging outcome emerged from a reform initiated in Colombia. In the early 1990s, Bogota’s Planning Office was seriously understaffed and unable to cope with the demand created by new construction. In 1995, the Planning Office began to use private professionals to carry out plan reviews and issue building permits.  As a result, the average time needed to process construction permits plummeted, from a daunting three years in 1995 to just 33 days in 2012. The use of private engineering expertise could possibly be extended to building inspections, which are still the responsibility of local “prefects”—individuals who lack the technical and financial resources to conduct professional inspections yet operate within the constraints of a demanding seismic environment.
///Recommendation 3.10/// **Create robust accountability mechanisms around public-private partnerships in building code compliance checks**.
When the conditions are appropriate, public authorities should ask for private sector assistance to ease the burden of administrative procedures. However, this approach should be strongly supported by robust safeguards to ensure that private sector building professionals are qualified, actually evaluated, and supervised by a centralized or specialized agency, and that risks of conflict of interests are monitored and minimized.
A comprehensive study conducted by the Delft University of Technology analyzed the results of involving private sector expertise in building regulatory enforcement in Australia, Canada, and New Zealand.<sup>102</sup>  Tracing roughly 20 years of building code implementation in these three countries, the study concludes that regimes relying on independent, private, third-party enforcement develop greater inspectoral depth, which leads in turn to “better regulatory goal achievement.” 
The same study also warns that introducing building controls systems based on private sector third-party mechanisms holds the potential of a loss in “equity and accountability In 1994, the state of Victoria in Australia introduced a competitive system of building controls that allowed private building surveyors as well as municipal councils to issue building permits. Those in the construction industry reported anecdotal cases of private surveyors yielding to commercial pressure by endorsing substandard building practices. The state of Victoria responded by improving oversight mechanisms on building professionals and private surveyors.<sup>103</sup> 
Reforms in FYR Macedonia and Colombia show that the introduction of efficient private building controls should always be supported by strong safeguards, usually in the form of more stringent qualification requirements for building professionals, as well as robust disciplinary and oversight mechanisms. Both countries are now in the process of building these checks and balances to offer more mature and robust building code enforcement systems. In Colombia, the 1995 reform allowed private sector practitioners to issue permits<sup>104</sup> in order to address serious backlogs and inefficiencies in the building planning agencies. This reform was followed over the subsequent 15 years with the incremental development of qualification requirements for this new category of private professionals. 
#### 4. To support code compliance, provide advisory services in addition to inspection and enforcement.
///Recommendation 4.1///  **Enhance the supporting role of regulatory function rather than police enforcement**.
Building regulators should make use of existing human resources in building and planning agencies to reach out to stakeholders and provide technical advice and guidance for improved disaster resilience. This approach should aim to increase compliance with minimum standards of safety in certain communities and in relation to specific building practices and local hazards, thus helping to reduce risk. As illustrated in the Central Java case study (Box 3.12), this approach requires a strong effort in communications by promoting and facilitating an advisory role for building inspectors. It seeks to change behaviors by building trust and confidence, as opposed to rely only on punitive approaches and traditional police enforcement.
Following the 2006 earthquake in Central Java, JICA facilitated an innovative initiative that used the formal building administration capacity and building permitting process to improve the quality and seismic resilience of 330,000 reconstructed non-engineered houses. The initiative provided cash transfers to owners involved in post-disaster reconstruction—conditional on their house passing predefined inspections at three different stages of construction. Interestingly, before the earthquake, the prevalent form of housing in the area had been informal and had escaped any measure of compliance with minimum safety standards. These advisory efforts targeting building trades and owner-builders with guidance on improved construction techniques and code compliance should be institutionalized and extended beyond reconstruction and applied for long-term risk reduction. 
///Recommendation 4.2///  **Use regulatory capacity to coordinate training for building trades, architects and engineers, and owner-builders on improved construction techniques and code compliance**.
As part of broader building code compliance strategies, building authorities should use their influence to partner with the private sector and ensure that all stakeholder groups involved in construction have ongoing access to training. Training artisans, masons, craftsmen, and construction workers in hazard-resistant methods is particularly important. 
Support for large-scale training programs for construction stakeholders is often part of major donor-funded post-disaster reconstruction programs. All too often, such innovations in training tend to end when the reconstruction process is completed; the level of political attention on risk reduction then begins to drop over time.  Building on the cutting-edge experience of reconstruction programs, public authorities should institutionalize effective trainings, beginning with training in non-engineered and traditional forms of construction that are most vulnerable to hazards.
#### 5. Take advantage of opportunities for regulatory interventions.
///Recommendation 5.1/// **Prioritize by building function and exposure to hazards**.
Application of regulatory resources should seek to maximize risk reduction, based on the importance of a structure’s function or occupancy as well as its hazard exposure. The priority of function is typically represented by an importance factor, which increases the requirement for structural resistance to reduce the probability of failure during a hazard event. 
Elevated importance factors apply to buildings whose functions are critically important immediately following hazard impact, as well as to structures that house functions that pose secondary hazards, such as explosion or toxic release (for example, industrial, chemical, or fuel storage). Structures critical to disaster response include medical facilities (hospitals and clinics), response capabilities (police and fire stations and emergency management facilities), and other public services buildings. Elevated importance factors also apply to buildings that house vulnerable or immobile populations (nursing homes, elderly housing, and prisons) and places of public assembly where exposed populations are concentrated. Schools have special importance because of the social priority placed on the safety of children.
The special importance of schools and hospitals has been recognized in targeted initiatives by many organizations. The state of California (from 1933), the Organization of American States, UNISDR, and GFDRR have all supported safe school construction and retrofit of existing school buildings. The Pan American Health Organization and UNISDR have addressed the disaster resilience of hospital buildings. These occupancy-targeted initiatives are important but should be developed as the starting point for broad, comprehensive regulatory initiatives to reduce disaster risk for the entire building stock.
In prioritizing buildings, authorities should also draw on hazard zone maps to differentiate building requirements in proportion to expected hazard loads. 
Functional importance and hazard exposure should not only be incorporated in the design requirements of the code, they should also be reflected in the diligence of review and inspection practiced by the regulatory authority.
///Recommendation 5.2///  **Utilize public building programs as points of entry for the regulatory process**.
For any new building regulatory program, authorities need to identify feasible points of entry or starting points for regulatory intervention. For example, where the public gives building occupancy high priority, it becomes more feasible to initiate the regulatory function. The organizational management and funding of construction is also a factor in the feasibility of developing regulatory processes. Design and construction of public school buildings is typically managed by organizations with technical capacity and budgetary control over projects. These rudimentary capabilities provide the opportunity to demonstrate safe construction materials and techniques. The tangible example of school construction can be used to instruct students, faculty, and the community on the methods and benefits of safer construction.
Similarly, in the case of health facilities, a construction management capacity and budgetary control for construction quality can provide the starting point for a demonstration of the building regulatory framework. Once the regulatory process is introduced through these formal sector building types, the concepts of safe construction standards, compliance assistance, and inspection should be expanded to serve other elements of the built environment.
In the case of California, seismic building regulation was initiated to protect schools and schoolchildren following a damaging earthquake in Long Beach in 1933. From that starting point, the state has developed one of the most comprehensive and effective building regulatory systems in the world.<sup>105</sup> 
///Recommendation 5.3/// **Exploit disaster experience to advance regulatory policy**.
Timing is a major consideration in identifying a feasible point of entry for a building regulatory process. Though life-saving and relief activities must be the focus in the immediate aftermath of a disaster, the post-disaster period offers a valuable opportunity for introducing or reforming a building regulatory process. Disaster damage and loss are eloquent arguments for improving construction quality. The task of reconstruction offers an excellent opportunity both for implementing improved building standards and for institutionalizing building regulatory systems to guide long-term resilient development in the future.
#### 6. Clearly identify hazard zones and restrict development according to exposure. 
///Recommendation 6.1///  **Execute hazard mapping for potential urban extension areas in advance of unregulated development to direct new settlement to safer sites**.
Avoiding hazardous sites is a most efficient means of disaster risk reduction. Safe location of new developments reduces exposure to hazard impact and reduces the requirement and cost of structural strengthening for resilience. Where possible, urban expansion should be directed to safer locations based on hazard mapping before uncontrolled informal settlement occurs. Alternative land uses should be encouraged for exposed areas such as floodplains, coastal hazard zones, and areas of elevated seismic or landslide risk. Hazard mapping should form an integral part of urban master planning, and its rationale should be widely shared with the public. 
To realize the ultimate benefit of excellent hazard mapping initiatives, such as CAPRA (Box 3.14), there must be effective mechanisms to ensure that hazard information is applied to safe siting and to improved construction for urban development.
///Recommendation 6.2///  **Reference hazard zones in building codes with emphasis on added structural requirements**.
Land use management is a fundamental tool for reducing disaster risk. Historical data and probabilistic modeling techniques make possible the development of hazard mapping, which distinguishes geographic zones in terms of expected hazard event frequency and intensity. Such maps can be developed for flood, earthquake, landslide, snow load, wind, and coastal hazards. This differentiation of hazard zones is essential for efficient balancing of design requirements for anticipated loads. 
To avoid the economic consequences of overdesign and the safety consequences of underdesign, hazard maps must be directly referenced in the building code. Compliance with hazard zone–related requirements must be assured through plan review and site inspection if the benefit of risk reduction is to be achieved.
///Recommendation 6.3///  **Execute hazard mapping for existing settlement areas to establish priorities for retrofit and relocation**.	
Hazard mapping for areas of existing settlements is critically important for identifying and prioritizing highly exposed and vulnerable areas. Defined hazard zones in existing settlements provide the basis for allocating resources for eventual relocation, retrofit, or increased vigilance for response and relief planning. 
Even in rapidly expanding urban areas, the greatest concentration of risk is likely to reside in previously unregulated existing areas. While this residual risk must be addressed, at present it is most important and most cost-effective to stop the expansion of risk in areas of new development. The financial and social costs of demolition and resettlement, or even structural retrofit, are far greater than the marginal added costs of safe siting and construction of new development. At the same time, the coincidence of extreme exposure, extreme structural vulnerability, and critical community functions in existing settlements must be identified and dealt with on a priority basis.
///Recommendation 6.4///  **Provide infrastructure in safer areas to direct urban expansion and land use**.
When infrastructure services—such as water, sanitation, electric power, and communications—are provided to existing slums or informal settlements, the cost has been two to three times as much as similar service provided at the outset of development.<sup>106</sup> 
Preference for development in safer areas can effectively be led by rational and efficient installation of infrastructure service systems. This requires collective community organization and specific technical ability involving formal sector competencies. The informal construction sector has demonstrated impressive productivity in building houses on individual plots. This type of construction can often be more efficiently carried out by less formal, owner-driven processes. Flexible and adaptive regulatory service delivery can provide the benefit of appropriate technical support and inspection to assure health, safety, and disaster resilience.
///Recommendation 6.5///  **Make public comprehensive information on hazard exposure and the rationale for land use management**.
Public understanding of hazard exposure is fundamental to informed choice. Information on historical hazard impacts and scientific projection of future hazard impacts must be shared in a form that supports informed public and individual decision making. Although natural disaster risk may not be a dominant short-term concern of new arrivals to urban areas, they should be provided with hazard information to factor into longer-term planning for security and advancement. 
///Recommendation 6.6///  **Institute alternative uses to occupy hazard zones**.
Urban land is at a premium in all parts of the world. The advantages of proximity to services and employment create a powerful force for development of convenient but unsafe sites. In order to preclude informal land invasions or market pressures for development, alternative uses for hazardous areas should be defined and implemented. Hazardous sites may be developed for low-occupancy activities such as urban agriculture or park and recreation areas. Such uses of hazardous areas serve to inhibit development and minimize new exposure to disaster risk.
#### 7. Advance supporting institutions.
An effective agenda to improve regulatory implementation in low- and middle-income countries should not focus only on core land use and building code system elements. There are contributing institutions and regulatory instruments, all part of a larger regulatory ecosystem, that play an equally important role in achieving compliant and safe construction. While the list of such institutions and instruments is potentially long, the impact of proactive reforms in the following areas is particularly worth noting: security of tenure, liability mechanisms for building professionals, accountability instruments for planning and building departments, and housing finance mechanisms (with a focus on those targeting lower-income groups). The selection and prioritization of reforms across the larger field of regulatory institutions should be based on a careful evaluation of local circumstances and development priorities.
///Recommendation 7.1///  **Improve regimes of tenure security to create greater incentive for compliance**.
The stronger land security is, the easier it is for households to invest in land, safer building materials, and more resilient forms of construction. This is particularly relevant to low-income groups. Any effort to improve building code compliance therefore depends on a larger commitment to land policy and land management reforms. Research consistently shows that possession of greater tenure security results in greater investments in the structure, as well as improved social outcomes.<sup>107</sup> 
No single prescriptive path leads to secured land tenure and property rights, but a wide range of policy and regulatory instruments can help address certain challenges and be adapted to meet local conditions. UN-Habitat regularly advocates the use of various alternative tenure options that can be adapted to circumstances in any area. It also promotes a cost-effective incremental approach to strengthening tenure rights, so that authorities can build capacity for more comprehensive and locally sensitive long-term options (Box 3.17).
Furthermore, Peru’s experience from 1996 to 2004 demonstrates that land titling programs can be very expensive without necessarily achieving their objectives.<sup>108</sup>  Many low-income households prefer the social cohesion that customary tenure arrangements can provide, or the mobility offered by renting, as long as they enjoy adequate security and land protection.<sup>109</sup>  
///Recommendation 7.2///  **Increase the accountability of building professionals by increasing liability regimes backed by insurance mechanisms**.
There is an opportunity to leverage insurance mechanisms into a strong driver of regulatory compliance.  This opportunity is more relevant to middle- and upper-middle-income countries, where the insurance industry can exercise a growing influence and increase its market penetration over time. In France, for example, private liability insurance and insurance carried by building professionals and private inspectors are by far the main drivers promoting compliance with building standards.<sup>110</sup> 
Assuming that market conditions are appropriate, meaning that there is a sufficiently established insurance industry, government authorities should consider mandating building professionals to carry a reasonable level of liability insurance. This would cover most claims likely to be encountered by designers, contractors, or public or private inspection agencies.
For policy makers, a particular challenge associated with the introduction of liability insurance is to avoid creating yet another barrier to entry for smaller and new entrants into the building design or construction businesses. At the same time, it is important to avoid instances of unfair competition, where responsible firms that obtain insurance are competing against firms that are unable or unwilling to obtain insurance (and that can therefore provide services at a lower cost).
In high-income settings such as Canada, building professional associations often require, through public legislation, that their members carry insurance. Where conditions allow it, other countries require a broad range of building professionals to carry liability insurance. Victoria, Australia, requires designers, draftspersons, and contractors to carry liability insurance, and it enforces this requirement through a builder registration system.
///Recommendation 7.3///  **Improve the capability and accountability of regulatory agencies through quality control measures**.
The initiative to establish and maintain the accountability of local building regulatory agencies should be based on formal systems of quality management and accreditation. National authorities should take the lead in mandating local building authorities to become accredited.
Well-established systems of accreditation for building regulatory agencies are in place in high-income countries (for example, the International Accreditation Service [IAS] of the ICC in the U.S.). Despite concerns expressed in this report about transposing practices from high-income to low-income countries, agency accreditation and staff certification offer operational models and functioning principles relevant to municipal building control activities in developing countries, with appropriate adaptation.
The IAS provides independent third-party recognition that a municipal building department is competent to carry out specific code enforcement activities. The IAS is a nonprofit, public-benefit corporation that has been providing accreditation services since 1975. It is a subsidiary of the ICC, a professional membership association that develops the construction codes and standards used by most municipalities within the United States. Its accreditation criteria reflect a strong commitment to maintaining transparency and procedural justice, an appropriate quality of service delivery, and a capacity to respond to natural hazards impacting construction (see Box 3.18).
While the IAS model of accreditation is primarily voluntary and provided by a private nonprofit public-benefit corporation, government authorities may also consider the innovative model of New Zealand, which introduced state accreditation of municipal building consent authorities as part of its Building Act of 2004. The accreditation and registration scheme in New Zealand was established to promote consistent, standardized, and good-quality practices in building control and to ensure better technical capabilities and resourcing, including adequate processes to respond to disaster risks. 
In July 2013, in an act that illustrates both the creation of accountability and the consequences attached to lower standards of institutional delivery, International Accreditation New Zealand (IANZ) withdrew its accreditation of the Building Consent Authority (BCA) of Christchurch. The grounds were deteriorating quality and speed of the building’s consent processes as well as insufficient transparency. The BCA eventually regained its status at the end of 2014 after implementing a broad action plan that, among other things, streamlined administrative procedures, reduced compliance costs, promoted more efficient services to customers, and refocused decision making on risk-based principles.<sup>111</sup> 
///Recommendation 7.4///  **Leverage housing finance mechanisms to spur investment into safer housing**.
Wider access to housing is typically correlated with increased economic growth and urban development. However, in most emerging economies, access to housing finance remains predominantly limited to middle- and upper-income households with stable and verifiable income. Only in a few countries, such as Mexico or Malaysia, have mortgage lenders reached down to finance moderate- or median-income households.
In countries with underdeveloped housing finance systems, buildings are constructed incrementally and informally with low-quality building materials and thus do not comply with planning and building code regulations.<sup>112</sup> Under such circumstances, safe code-compliant construction is difficult to attain.
Enumerating the requirements of a sustainable housing finance system exceeds the scope of this report. However, as part of targeted efforts to reduce disaster  and chronic risks, public authorities should address housing finance needs of low-income and underserved households. As highlighted earlier, low-income groups are consistently more exposed to chronic and natural hazard–related risks.
Authorities should try in particular to support sustainable housing microfinance (HMF) in low- and middle-income countries. HMF portfolios remain small in proportion to GDP or bank assets, but have managed to reach a relatively large scale in places like Peru. Here, more than 1.2 million households have benefited from HMF within the framework of title formalization programs in the past few years. Peru shows that, under the right conditions, HMF can effectively address the needs of poor households and become a lucrative line of business for banks. In addition, because these households have also achieved security in their titles, they now have a stronger incentive to invest in home improvements.
The combination of housing finance (to reduce the structural risks of incremental construction) and the monitoring of construction quality (to ensure code compliance) serves to protect both the health and safety of buildings occupants and the collateral of the mortgage lender.
Housing finance can be offered on the condition that the structure to be financed conforms to code and zoning requirements. In the case of financial assistance for reconstruction following the 2005 earthquake in Pakistan, financing was provided in increments conditioned on passing inspection at each of the stages of the construction process. The first tranche of funding was provided on approval of the site, the second on the completion and approval of the foundation, the third on the completion of the walls, and the final payment after approval of the completed structure. This proved a very effective means to ensure code compliance. This strict control was justified to protect the collateral, not to mention the well-being of the building occupant in specific conditions of the subsidized reconstruction program. 
Where mortgage financing is offered in a nondisaster situation, a similar requirement for code compliance can be exercised with the cooperation of the local regulatory authority. Such control clearly benefits both the owner/occupant and the lender in terms of protecting the value of the loan. In sophisticated construction markets, lenders can require the participation of insurers to guarantee the value of the loan. In this case, the feasibility of underwriting is facilitated by the competence of the local regulatory authority in assuring both code compliance and reasonably predictable building performance under prescribed loads. 
Neither lenders nor insurers have the capacity to manage plan review or site inspection independently. The presence of a competent regulatory authority and an adequate building code makes this type of leverage for public safety possible.
///Recommendation 7.5///  **Mobilize market demand for safer buildings**.
In a range of developed countries, building codes are recognized as a minimum acceptable standard of construction. Despite the fact that this minimum standard can provide the basis for calculating insurance premiums, it does not necessarily correspond to owner demand or expectations for resilient building performance. Voluntary standards that exceed code requirements have been developed for several aspects of building performance, including energy efficiency and disaster resilience.
In response to market demand, the private sector and NGOs have developed independent programs of performance certification to certify design and construction that meet performance standards beyond those provided for by codes. The success of independent building certification programs such as LEED and Fortified Homes (Institute for Business and Home Safety) and Resilience Star (U.S. Department of Homeland Security) show the value of building safety in the real estate market. Buildings certified as above-code enjoy higher valuation in the market and demonstrate market incentives for greater investment in building safety and resilience. When the consumer recognizes the value of resilient construction and is willing to pay a premium for such quality, the market becomes an effective driver of safe construction.
Voluntary choice of higher levels of building performance can be incentivized by both private and public means. Insurance companies can reduce premiums when risk reduction measures are incorporated in building design and construction. This reduction can, in turn, increase access to mortgage financing. Public incentives for measures going beyond code requirements can include flexibility in zoning or parking requirements.
The majority of voluntary compliance instruments have emerged in developed countries in the field of “building sustainability” focused on energy and resource use efficiency. However, sustainability also refers to disaster resilience. Leading international green building standards such as LEED, BREEAM, and Green Star are now starting to incorporate elements and credits relating to climate resilience. 
Additionally, there are resilience designation programs for homes such as “Resilience Star” and the Institute for Business and Home Safety “Fortified Home” program in the U.S. Both initiatives are based on the market value of certified added safety. The market approach leads to safer building products through profit-oriented response to informed consumer demand.
A recent initiative led by UNISDR, in collaboration with the Pacific Asia Travel Association and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), is now working with a wide range of public and private stakeholders in the tourism sector. The Hotel Resilient Initiative aims to develop standards and tools for hotels and resorts that can be used to demonstrate commitment to disaster resilience and customer safety.  This initiative recognizes safety as a market value. 
As noted earlier in this chapter, there is a good argument to introduce noncoercive instruments into compliance strategies. About 15–20 years’ experience in green building rating systems shows that voluntary mechanisms can be creatively combined with regulatory instruments to support more in-depth market transformations. For example, in Turkey, BEP-TR mandates a minimum “C” energy efficiency label for any new buildings. Although attaining “C” is mandatory, the “A” and “B” ratings are voluntary and are respectively 40 and 20 percent more efficient than the “C” level. Compliance with “A” and “B” levels is encouraged through an incentive program allowing a local bank to provide lower interest rates on mortgages and construction loans.<sup>113</sup> 
As dedicated building resilience standards and certification systems make their way into developing countries, there is an opportunity for local governments to promote these instruments as supporting mechanisms for risk reduction. Local governments can facilitate this process by providing incentives, especially nonfinancial incentives. For example, municipalities in India are now supporting voluntary building sustainability standards through a wide range of nonfiscal incentives, including expedited building or zoning permits, expedited plan reviews, increased floor area ratio (FAR) and density bonuses, and permitted mixed-use development. The same range of cost-effective instruments could support a larger market take-up of standards for resilient construction.
