## Conclusion
Building and land use regulation has proven to be an effective tool for  risk reduction in the developed world. To date, such regulatory measures have proven ineffective in low- and middle-income countries. The recommendations in this chapter are based on the review of ineffective or failed regulation in Chapter 1 and the review of effective regulation, especially regulation that has involved solving specific problems, in Chapter 2. 
The reform agenda outlined above seeks to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of building regulation, and so guide urban development to less hazardous locations and less vulnerable structures. 
An effective building regulatory regime begins with the foundation of national legislation that establishes rights and responsibilities, including organizational responsibilities for the core regulatory process. This foundation must be properly designed and executed both to support the organizational structure for development and maintenance of context-appropriate codes and standards, and to facilitate code implementation at municipal and local levels. 
The characteristics of successful code development processes and documents are known. The major burden of regulatory implementation and compliance falls at the local level. The recommendations in this chapter relate to administrative practice, compliance support, and procedural justice. They point to education and training for building professionals and builders, as well as advisory support to facilitate code compliance, as a valuable complement to the normal processes of review, inspection, and enforcement. Specific recommendations are directed to the efficient allocation of regulatory resources to maximize risk reduction—a process that must take into account the limited administrative resources in low- and middle-income countries, particularly at the local level. 
Though these recommendations focus on the core components of the regulatory process, it is clear that successful building regulation depends on the functioning of key supporting institutions. Investment in building professional education, building finance and insurance, and increased security of tenure can contribute significantly to code compliance and building safety.
This agenda outlined above provides the basis for a proposed Building Regulation for Resilience Program to support the development of building and land use regulatory capacity in low- and middle-income countries. That program is presented in the next chapter.