## 3.4 Summary of recommendations///1.	Establish a sound legislative and administrative foundation at the national level.///1.1 Establish a legislative foundation for a building and land use regulatory authority to protect public health and safety and reduce disaster and chronic risk.1.2 Adopt a legal framework to support the effective enforcement of building code regulations at the local level.1.3 Adopt other critical legislation that contributes to compliant construction.///2. Develop a building code suitable to local social and economic conditions that facilitates safe use of local building materials and practices.///2.1 Establish an open, participatory, consensus-based process for code development.2.2 Adopt a local building code referencing an established model code while incorporating necessary adaptations to local context.2.3 Develop a comprehensive building code that covers the full range of relevant construction types and practices.2.4 Establish building materials testing and certification laboratories that are accessible to major construction zones.2.5 Provide for wide dissemination of code documents and training for builders and owners based on code documentation.2.6 Create and maintain public awareness of basic safe construction principles for the community, building owners, and informal sector builders. ///3. Strengthen implementation of building code through plan review, site inspection, and permitting at the local level.///3.1 Enhance compliance by applying principles of procedural justice and transparency.3.2 Communicate changes associated with local building regulatory reforms.3.3 Establish conflict resolution and appeal mechanisms.3.4 Provide funding and support to building departments at the local level with technically qualified and adequately compensated building officials.3.5 Simplify and reengineer building permitting and inspections procedures.3.6 Apply ICT to support increased efficiency and transparency of building control procedures.3.7 Apply risk management to construction permits and inspections.3.8 Apply fee levels consistent with the cost of regulatory services.3.9 Leverage resources from the private sector for more efficient and effective compliance check mechanisms.3.10 Create robust accountability mechanisms around public-private partnerships in building code compliance checks.///4. To support code compliance, provide advisory services in addition to inspection and enforcement.///4.1 Enhance the supporting role of regulatory function rather than police enforcement.4.2 Use regulatory capacity to coordinate training for building trades, architects and engineers, and owner-builders on improved construction techniques and code compliance.///5. Take advantage of opportunities for regulatory interventions.///5.1 Prioritize by building function and exposure to hazards.5.2 Utilize public building programs as points of entry for the regulatory process.5.3 Exploit disaster experience to advance regulatory policy.///6. Clearly identify hazard zones and restrict development according to exposure.///6.1 Execute hazard mapping for potential urban extension areas in advance of unregulated development to direct new settlement to safer sites.6.2 Reference hazard zones in building codes with emphasis on added structural requirements.6.3 Execute hazard mapping for existing settlement areas to establish priorities for retrofit and relocation.6.4 Provide infrastructure in safer areas to direct urban expansion and land use.6.5 Make public comprehensive information on hazard exposure and the rationale for land use management.6.6 Institute alternative uses to occupy hazard zones.///7. Advance supporting institutions.///7.1 Improve regimes of tenure security to create greater incentive for compliance.7.2 Increase the accountability of building professionals by increasing liability regimes backed by insurance mechanisms.7.3 Improve the capability and accountability of regulatory agencies through quality control measures.7.4 Leverage housing finance mechanisms to spur investment into safer housing.7.5 Mobilize market demand for safer buildings.